---
title: "Memory"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Data Structures
  - Memory
---

### Key Terms

* **Bit**

Short for binary digit, a bit is a fundamental unit of information in Computer Science that represents a state with one of two values, typically 0 and 1.

Any data stored in a computer is, at the most basic level, represented in bits.


<br>

* **Byte**

A group of eight bits. For example, 01101000 is a byte. <br>
A single byte can represent up to 256 data values (2<sup>8</sup>). <br>
Since a binary number is a number expressed with only two symbols, like 0 and 1, a byte can effectively represent all the numbers between 0 and 255, inclusive, in binary format.

The following bytes represents the numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4 in binary format.

1: 00000001 <br>
2: 00000010 <br>
3: 00000011 <br>
4: 00000100

Every place from right to left (google for endianness if you are interesting why it’s so) represent 2<sup>n</sup> starting from 0.


<br>

* **Fixed-Width Integer**


An integer represented by a fixed amount of bits. For example, a 32-bit integer is an integer represented by 32 bits (4 bytes), and a 64-bit integer is an integer represented by 64 bits (8 bytes). <br>
The following is the 32-bit representation of the number 1, with clearly separated bytes. <br>
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001

<br>
The following is the 64-bit representation of the number 10, with clearly separated bytes. <br>
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00001010

Regardless of how large an integer is, its fixed-width-integer representation is, by definition, made up of a constant number of bits. <br>
It follows that, regardless of how large an integer is, an operation performed on its fixed-width-integer representation consists of a constant number of bits manipulations, <br>
since the integer is made up of a fixed number of bits. So integer equal 1 will take same amount of memory as 2147483647.

<br>

#### Memory

Broadly speaking, memory is the foundational layer of the computing, where all data is stored.

It's important to note the following points:

- Data stored in memory is stored in bytes and, by extension, bits.
- Bytes in memory can “point” to other bytes in memory, to store references to other data.
- The amount of memory that machine has is bounded, making it valuable to limit how much memory an algorithm takes up.
- Accessing a byte or a fixed number of bytes (like 4 bytes or 8 bytes in the case of 32-bit and 64-bit integers) is an elementary operation, which can be loosely treated as a single unit of operational work.
- Memory slot, can fit 8-bits which is 1 byte. For example 32-bit integer would take 4 memory slots.
- Memory slot can store address to another memory slot, that’s called a pointer.
- When you are storing integer, its typically fix-width integer, means It's either 8/16/32/64 bit. Point is we know how many bytes it will take up.
- If it takes more than one memory slot it’s going to have to be stored however many memory slots are needed to store it. Back to back and free.
- Storing list work similar, if you're going to want to store list of five 32-bit integers, for instance, that’s list it's going to have 20 memory slots.